<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-60 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000016994001" </HT>
<HEADER>
<DATE1>   25 March 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
Document Type:FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--WEST EUROPE 
<H3> <TI>      FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--FB PSE 94-013--WEST EUROPE </TI></H3>
</HEADER>
<TEXT>
Europe     Economic Review:  WESTERN EUROPE Vol. III, No. 13, 24 
March 1994 
   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a series published by 
FBIS Europe/Latin America Group featuring brief summaries of foreign 
media reports on topical issues, compiled from the most recent 
sources available to FBIS. 
   Europe Economic Review (EER) is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA 
SURVEY published by the West and East European Divisions of 
Europe/Latin America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas 
bureaus.  The EER is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Report for West and East Europe, 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear in other FBIS publications. The EER is published in two 
editions, one for Western Europe (also including media coverage of 
Canada and Turkey), and the other for Eastern Europe.  Drawing 
primarily from domestic media sources of these countries but also 
using other foreign media where appropriate, the EER focuses on 
national and regional economic issues, such as economic 
competitiveness, regional economic integration, economic reforms and 
other changes in economic policies, and foreign trade and 
investment. 
    FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S  Government.  All comment or analysis contained herein is 
attributable to the cited media source, unless otherwise indicated. 
    TABLE OF CONTENTS 
    FEATURES: 
    Sweden--Exporters Set Their Sights on China 
    EU 
    Rapid Conclusions of Leuna Dispute Sought; EBRD Doubles 
Investment in East Europe 
    FINLAND 
    Commentary Views Reich's Jobs Solutions 
    FRANCE 
    Editorial Discusses G-7 Job Summit; Commentary Advocates Social 
Welfare Commitment; Job Summit Ignores World Unemployment;Commentary 
on G-7 Job Summit; U.S. Seen Speaking 'Double Talk' on Audiovisual; 
Sapin Discusses Monetary Policy; Editorial on OECD Views on French 
Interest Rates; Editorial on Government Subsidies;Dassault Asks 
Assembly To Stop Rafale Delays; Roots of Unemployment Viewed; U.S. 
'Pressure' Divides EU on Naval Construction 
    GERMANY 
    Commentators View Jobs Summit; Environmental Technology Seen As 
Creating Jobs; Governments Push Small Business Funding; New 
Semiconductor Plant Opens in East; Bitterfeld Chemical Facilities 
Expanded 
    GREECE 
    Civil Service 'Inflation' Noted; Greek-Romanian Economic 
Relations;  Energy Pollution Taxes Assessed 
    ITALY 
    Labor Minister Discusses Black Market Labor; Recent Labor 
Accords Seen As Stopgap Measures; ENI's Plans To Expand East 
    NORWAY 
    Record Export Year Reported; Pension Fund Called 'Profitable 
Business';  Swedish Bank Predicts Growth for Norway, Denmark; 1993 
Profitable for Most Businesses; New Oil Drilling Planned; 
Competitiveness of Norwegian Shelf Assessed7 
    SWEDEN 
    Swedish Contribution to EU Budget Calculated 
    ECONOMIC BRIEFS 
    France, Greece, Norway 
    FEATURE 
    Sweden:   Exporters Set Their Sights on China 
    With many Swedish companies hoping to take advantage of the 
Chinese economic boom, exports to China have more than doubled in 
the last two years.  In fact, according to a 29 January SVENSKA 
DAGBLADET survey of Swedish economic activity in China, the Far East 
is well on its way to becoming a more important market for Swedish 
firms than North America.  Swedish exports to China increased from 
1.6 to 3.5 billion kronor between 1991 and 1993, and more Swedish 
firms are establishing joint ventures in China as well.  The 
commercial section at the Swedish embassy in Beijing described 1993 
as a "real record year." 
    Despite the export boom, Sweden's trade picture with China is 
not all rosy.  According to the 29 January SVENSKA DAGBLADET, Sweden 
continues to maintain a trade deficit with China because imports 
from that country--especially textiles--have increased dramatically. 
In recent years, China has replaced Portugal as the leading supplier 
of textiles to Sweden.  The business weekly VECKANS AFFARER also 
reported on 21 February that Sweden's share of Chinese imports has 
decreased from 1.35 percent in 1987 to under 1 percent in 1993. 
This is attributed to Eurocentric attitudes on the part of many 
Swedish firms. 
    Ericsson: The Shining Star 
    The Ericsson electronics company accounts for the lion's share-- 
60 percent--of Sweden's exports to China, which is well on its way 
to becoming Ericsson's largest market, according to an article in 
DAGENS NYHETER on 29 January.  Ericsson has been most successful in 
exporting mobile phones to China, where it holds a 70-percent market 
share.  The article cites Hans Ekstrom, the company's head of 
operations in China, as saying that "the sale of mobile telephones 
in China has been a real cash cow for us."  Ericsson's sales of 
these phones--a popular status symbol in China--doubled in 1992 and 
1993 and are expected to further increase when China installs a 
standardized digital system.  Ericsson already has an advantage in 
the vast Chinese market because of its ability to build large-scale 
systems.  According to the article, the firm sees its most important 
competitors in establishing a mobile phone system in China as 
Motorola and the Finnish firm Nokia.  The article also notes that a 
large part of the export credits for Ericsson's sales is expected to 
come from foreign institutions because of the low risk tolerance of 
Swedish banks. 
    Ericsson, which last year moved its southern China office from 
Hong Kong to Guangzhou to be closer to its customers, has been 
particularly active in Guangdong--a province of 66 million 
inhabitants whose capital is Guangzhou.  According to the 31 January 
SVENSKA DAGBLADET, Ericsson has 40 percent of the overall public 
telecommunications market in Guangdong, second only to Japan's 
NEC, and 80 percent of the market for mobile telephones.  In 
addition, the company has received 80 percent of all new 
telecommunications orders in the province in the last three years. 
Last year it got a 2.5-billion-kronor order from Guangdong Post &amp; 
Telecom to expand the regular telephone system to 2 million new 
subscribers; the order will be 15 percent financed by state- 
backed Swedish export credits.  Ericsson is also one of five 
companies invited to bid on building a digital GSM mobile phone 
system in the province;  according to an article in DAGENS NYHETER 
on 29 January, Ericsson has an advantage in the competition because 
it built Guangdong's GSM test system.  SVENSKA DAGBLADET also 
reported on 1 March that Ericsson got a 1.7-billion- kronor order 
from the province, which the deputy head of Ericsson Radio Systems 
in China called "one of our largest orders ever," to build an 
analogue system for mobile phones, called the Total Access 
Communication System.  It will also deliver mobile phone exchanges, 
radio base stations, a system for maintenance and monitoring, and 
subscriber databases, all of which will be produced in Sweden. 
    Other Players 
    Other Swedish firms are hoping to take advantage of the 
development of the Chinese infrastructure, especially the railroad 
industry.  Asea Brown Boveri (ABB), a Swedish-Swiss electrical 
engineering giant, is perhaps the second most active Swedish company 
in China.  An article in the 29 January SVENSKA DAGBLADET explains 
how ABB, whose sales in China totalled 1.5 billion kronor in 1992, 
has capitalized on China's energy and transportation needs to 
carve out a niche for itself in the Chinese market.  While the 
company had only 50 employees in Hong Kong and China five years ago, 
that total has now risen to 1,500.  China is its single largest 
market for power generators, power transmitters, and trains.  ABB 
hopes for large sales of its X2000 high speed train as well. 
According to a SVENSKA DAGBLADET report from 27 October, the 
railroad is also among Atlas Copco's biggest Chinese customers. 
The mining engineering firm, which has built dams and tunnels in 
China, is hoping for a contract to construct tunnels for the high- 
speed train route between Beijing and Hong Kong.  Last year SKF, a 
ball bearings manufacturer, also got what the report calls a 
"breakthrough" order from the railroad.  SKF had previously 
concentrated on supplying ball bearings and components for 
textile machines in China.  The Swedish trade counselor in Beijing 
told SVENSKA DAGBLADET on 27 October that Swedish exporters can be 
as successful in the railroad industry in China as Ericsson has been 
in the telecommunications sector, providing they can secure 
financing.  However, the Swedish development aid organization, which 
has established strict regulations on deals in China, has not been 
forthcoming. 
   Looking at the success of Swedish industry in China, an article 
in SVENSKA DAGBLADET on 29 January notes that the country is also an 
important market for Hagglunds, which produces heavy machinery. 
China makes up 30-40 percent of Hagglunds' market worldwide for 
hydraulic motors.  The company also sells cranes, many of which are 
made in a joint venture in Nanjing, to China's growing shipbuilding 
business.  Its vehicles are also being used in oil exploration on 
the coast and the Yellow River delta. 
    Automaker Volvo has been making inroads into the Chinese market 
through local representation and joint ventures, another article in 
SVENSKA DAGBLADET on 29 January claims.  Although sales slacked off 
last year due to tight Chinese economic policies, the company is 
expecting sales to increase this year.  It has 10 retail and service 
locations in China and earlier this year opened an office in 
Beijing.  Last Fall Volvo concluded a joint venture agreement with 
Xian Aircraft Company for the production and marketing of buses. 
The factory will start by producing 1,000 buses a year and then 
increase to 3,000; it will employ 1,100 workers.  An article in 
DAGENS NYHETER on 29 January notes that the company is hoping to 
open another production facility.  (WS) 
    EU 
    RAPID CONCLUSION OF LEUNA DISPUTE SOUGHT--At a meeting in Bonn 
to discuss economic convergence between the two countries, French 
and German parliamentarians pointed out the symbolic character of 
the proposed Leuna oil refinery, which France's Elf oil company 
agreed to build in eastern Germany.  The refinery project, they 
claim, could solidify industrial links between France and Germany. 
To do so, however, the parliamentarians state that there needs to be 
a quick resolution of the dispute which has arisen between Elf 
and Germany's Trust Agency over Elf's desire to reduce its 
investment commitment to the project.  Noting that this investment 
was "vital for overcoming the difficulties of eastern Germany's 
chemical industry," the parliamentarians added that besides the 
purely political considerations, necessary market considerations 
must not be neglected.  However, any arrangement should proceed 
"with the general principle of law which says that contracts 
concluded should be respected in their spirit." 
    Because of the impasse in the negotiations between the Trust 
Agency and Elf, the economy minister of Saxe-Anhalt, where Leuna is 
located, intends to talk directly to Elf.  Additionally, officials 
at Germany's Thyssen, Elf's partner and coinvestor in the refinery, 
declared they were convinced the issue would be resolved soon and 
that the question of Elf's ownership share could be resolved 
internally between Thyssen and Elf. (DiI)  (Paris LES ECHOS 
in French 10 Mar 94 p 10) 
    EBRD DOUBLES INVESTMENT IN EAST EUROPE--The European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) approved 91 projects in East 
Europe in 1993, which represented a financial investment of 2.28 
billion ECU's or two times more than the preceding year, according 
to an EBRD report published on 9 March.  In 1992, the bank approved 
51 projects representing 1.09 billion ECU's.  The report indicates 
that in 1993, EBRD loans made possible East European projects worth 
11.3 billion ECU's compared to 7 billion ECU's in 1992 and 1.5 
billion ECU's during the first nine months of the banks existence in 
1991.  According to the report, EBRD wants to maintain the same 
level of investment this year as in 1993. 
    However, as in 1992, EBRD only disbursed a small fraction of the 
approved sums: Out of the 2.28 billion ECU's approved, only 435 
million ECU's were actually made available to projects, according to 
an article in LES ECHOS.  This "enormous" difference between 
approved and disbursed funds, although caused by projects structured 
for completion over several years, may rekindle the debate on EBRD's 
ability to lend.  The article questions whether this might thwart 
EBRD's attempt to highlight the good conditions of its accounts 
after the past year when the bank was criticized for former director 
Jacques Attali's management.  In any case, EBRD can point to 
progress in containing bank operating expenses, which at 137.3 
million ECU's are 8 percent less than forecast, according to the 
report. (DiI)  (Paris LES ECHOS in French 10 Mar 94 p 7) 
    FINLAND 
    COMMENTARY VIEWS REICH'S JOBS SOLUTIONS--In the lead editorial 
for Helsinki HUFVUDSTADSBLADET on 16 March, editor-in-chief Bo 
Stenstrom commented on U.S. Labor Secretary Robert Reich's message 
at the G-7 Jobs Summit that infrastructure investment is a major 
factor in creating employment.  While admitting that Finland, with 
its over 20-percent unemployment rate, has not been as successful as 
the United States in putting people to work, Stenstrom criticizes 
those who have taken Reich's ideas as a "job creation recipe in 
itself."  Stenstrom argues that investing in infrastructure will not 
automatically lead to better jobs and better wages.  He cites 
assertions that while the United States has indeed a better record 
as far as raw unemployment figures, that many of these jobs are low- 
paid service sector positions.  Stenstrom suggests that both Reich's 
and the G-7's White Papers are too eager to diminish the role of the 
public sector, which Stenstrom sees as vital for "providing 
training" to improve workers' skills to make them more competitive 
with those in developing countries. 
    Stenstrom also points to another problem particular to Finland's 
virtually flat population growth, a problem he believes 
infrastructure investing alone cannot solve: overproduction as 
industry and workers become more efficient.  He reasons that growth 
in industrial production leads toinvestment in technology, which 
will improve productivity but cut jobs.  The lack of population 
growth, with its attendant reduction in consumption, makes 
Finland unable to absorb more production or create more employment, 
Stenstrom maintains.  He questions whether Finland or Europe are 
going to provide the ever higher-paying and higher-skilled jobs 
demanded by its more educated work force.  As an example of how 
European governments are running out of solutions, he mentions such 
practices as Denmark's sabbatical leave program, which--used as a 
substitute for paying unemployment compensation--is "a big 
minus" for the economy.  "We are resorting to such methods in a 
situation which we cannot in the long run afford." (RB)  (Helsinki 
HUFVUDSTADSBLADET in Finnish 16 Mar 94 p 2) 
    FRANCE 
    EDITORIAL DISCUSSES G-7 JOB SUMMIT--Deputy editor-in-chief for 
macroeconomics Francoise Crouigneau writes in the Paris financial 
daily LES ECHOS that the G-7 job summit in Detroit is strongly 
symbolic despite the fact that the United States has transformed 
"this think-tank seminar" into a "media happening" and that each of 
the G-7 countries is "showing off" its own solutions for 
unemployment.  The meeting, Crouigneau contends, is an 
acknowledgment of "worry and of powerlessness" when faced with 
safeguarding the competitiveness of the companies of industrial 
countries and their ability to employ workers.  The world's work 
force seems to have a choice between being poorly paid and unskilled 
overseas or being skilled but unemployed in Europe. 
    Crouigneau argues that if the future world job market depends on 
the highly skilled, then Europe, despite its unemployment problems, 
is further along than the United States, which has essentially 
created low-skilled jobs.  However, creating jobs in the future is 
all the more troublesome since the solution is no longer the 
budgetary and monetary management of governments.  The emergence of 
newly industrialized countries creates an unknown factor in the 
rules of the game for foreign trade.  These rules, Crouigneau points 
out, are all the more important now since  economic guerilla 
warfare" has replaced past relationships built on politics and the 
Cold War.  Today, the most advanced nations are condemned to adapt 
and innovate to survive.  To do so, they must recognize that two 
conditions are needed.  They must agree to at least a minimum of 
coordination so that growth in the G-7 countries can resume, and 
they must reform their economies to address unemployment caused 
by high labor costs.  Crouigneau acknowledges that no one has the 
secret for accomplishing the latter. (DiI)  (Paris LES ECHOS in 
French 14 Mar 94 p 4) 
   COMMENTARY ADVOCATES SOCIAL WELFARE COMMITMENT--According to 
Pascal Riche writing in the 15 March Paris daily LIBERATION, U.S. 
Labor Secretary Robert Reich's comments that countries do not have 
to choose between good jobs or a decent life is an attempt to 
achieve a convergence between Europe's need to create unskilled jobs 
and the U.S. need for skilled employment.  However, while this 
approach seems logical, it may not be the right one, Riche argues. 
The United States is just beginning to try creating skilled jobs and 
no conclusion can be drawn from the U.S. experience at this time. 
As for Europe, it tried "various schemes" during the "laissez-faire" 
1980's to do the same and failed to produce results, which has led 
to the French Government now proposing to modify minimum wage 
requirements for young people.  For Europeans to seek a third way 
between the two models would probably result in a system that would 
only "preserve the disadvantages of the two systems," Riche 
contends.  Instead, he advocates that European governments "deepen" 
their commitment to social welfare.  These governments, Roche notes, 
failed in the fight against unemployment because they did not 
deal with unemployment in a timely manner.  While he adds that some 
blame budgetary difficulties for this neglect, he also points out 
that successive governments allowed social costs to escalate and did 
not recognize the importance of job training.  At the same time, 
working Europeans fought to preserve salary raises in disregard of 
labor market conditions.  However, Riche concludes that if there had 
been more commitment to maintaining social welfare during the 
1980's, the government might have formulated policies to 
stimulate economic growth to alleviate unemployment rather than 
trying its various ineffective job creation schemes.  Instead, it 
allowed unemployment to "swallow up" working people "as if a l0- 
percent unemployment rate were considered 'normal'."  (RM)  (Paris 
LIBERATION in French 15 Mar 94 p 3) 
    JOB SUMMIT IGNORES WORLD UNEMPLOYMENT--Gerard Dupuy, commenting 
on the G-7 Job Summit in the 15 March Paris daily LIBERATION, cites 
a recent report noting that unemployment rates in the rest of the 
world are "hugely" higher than the rate in rich countries. 
According to Dupuy, these "hundreds of millions of unemployed will 
be ignored in Detroit."  Given the breadth of the challenge, it is 
easy to see why summit participants have warned that "no decisions 
should be expected."  While unemployment problems in less-developed 
countries will make a "timid" appearance at the summit, Dupuy is 
skeptical about any impact it might have since he sees in it "less 
compassion about the miseries of the present" and more concern about 
the threat that such a  problem entails. (RM)  (Paris LIBERATION in 
French 15 Mar 94 p 3) 
    COMMENTARY ON G-7 JOB SUMMIT--Delphine Girard, commenting in the 
Paris business daily LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES on the G-7 Job Summit, 
stated that President Bill Clinton's message on unemployment caught 
Europe "on the wrong foot."  Europeans have for months been trying 
to explain to distraught workers, especially in France, that they 
must choose between wages and employment.  Clinton could have used 
the summit to provide a "final blow" to "old [European] complaints" 
about social welfare and unemployment, Girard claimed.  Instead, 
Clinton stressed that it is not by underpaying wages and 
multiplying small jobs that industrialized countries will improve 
unemployment.  To create employment, he said, they must instead 
raise living standards by increasing salaries, favoring higher 
education to foster technological progress, developing productivity 
in industries of the future, and reinforcing social protection. 
(DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 17 Mar 94 p 3) 
    U.S. SEEN SPEAKING 'DOUBLE TALK' ON AUDIOVISUAL-- According to 
Emmanuel Schwartzenberg writing the economic supplement to LE 
FIGARO, Le Fig-Eco,  the United States is speaking "double talk" 
when it comes to audiovisual policy since U.S. Trade Representative 
Mickey Kantor says one thing while President of the Motion Picture 
Association of America (MPAA) Jack Valenti says another.  While 
Kantor has again threatened to use U.S. trade laws to force Europe 
to open its audiovisual market, Valenti has been very conciliatory 
toward Europeans declaring, "The government position and that of U.S 
producers and distributors is not identical.  Cinema is outside the 
political field and it is I who guards the keys to the house. 
Kantor has never consulted me on the question of trade sanctions." 
    Schwartzenberg contends that Valenti, since the GATT agreement, 
considers that the "too intransigent position" of the U.S. 
Government reinforces European cohesion and may prod the EU to 
establish a "super" trade regulation prejudicial to U.S. interests. 
Persuaded that "new technologies, which allow each television viewer 
to create his own program, will render legislation obsolete," 
Valenti considers that "France, as can the other European countries, 
can legislate all it wants."  (DiI)  (Paris LE FIGARO Le Fig-Eco 
supplement in French 10 Mar 94 p XII) 
    SAPIN DISCUSSES MONETARY POLICY--In an interview with a panel of 
journalists from LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES, Bank of France Monetary 
Policy Council (MPC) member and former Socialist Economy and Finance 
Minister Michel Sapin claimed that the Bank of France has "without 
question" become independent.  Nonetheless, Sapin stated he would 
continue the policy followed by the current French Government and 
its predecessors of monetary coordination with the Bundesbank.  He 
also refuted the idea that this policy increases unemployment, 
warned the government about increasing deficits, and said there 
was no "lasting" relationship between U.S. interest rates and those 
of Europe. 
    Although he contended that the Bank of France was "certainly" 
independent, Sapin noted that questions were often asked about the 
counterpart of independence, that is, collegiality."  "There is no 
independence without collegiality," Sapin argued, "because it is 
rarely the case that the correct monetary decision is clearcut." 
Decisions are made within the context of a network of constraints 
and contradictions.  To appreciate these contradictory elements and 
this complexity, it is better to put several people together having 
different agendas, experiences, and languages so that monetary 
decisions can be made.  Besides, he added, when monetary decisions 
were a government responsibility, they too were made after a 
collegial debate. 
    Sapin, pointing out that the MPC was obliged to be accountable 
to the public and to be responsible in what it said since financial 
markets "watch its every word," stated that it was more necessary 
than ever to coordinate French monetary policy with the Bundesbank. 
The problem with France's relationship with the Bundesbank is not a 
question of independence.  It is a question of either thinking of 
monetary policy in a French or a European sense.  In Sapin's view, 
the need to establish a European single currency must not be 
influenced by economic or market conditions.  The objective is to 
quickly establish a single currency to be able then to have more 
decisive margins of maneuver in relation to the United States and 
Asia.  To arrive at that stage, "we must go through some 
turbulence," he said. 
    Regarding unemployment, Sapin said that it cannot be reduced 
without economic growth but that growth is not enough.  In France, 
structural unemployment existed before the recession and it will 
remain after the recovery if something is not done about it.  Sapin 
argues that current monetary policy does not aggravate unemployment, 
since its emphasis on stability has given the economy a sound base. 
Nonetheless, Sapin stated that unemployment was one of his main 
preoccupations. 
    Budget deficits are another.  Sapin said it did not bother him 
if deficits were used in recessions to help fuel the economy. 
However, when recovery starts the government must change its 
spending policy or consumers and companies either will not have 
access to money or the money will cost too much.  "We are at this 
point today," he said, and the government must now make reducing the 
deficit a priority to meet the very strict budgetary requirements 
for French-German convergence. 
    Sapin was also asked how he explained what happened in financial 
markets when the United States raised its interest rates.  He 
replied that the U.S. interest rate hike affected Europe for "no 
rational reason," indicating that European financial agents did not 
understand that increased rates in the United States are not 
contradictory with pursuing lower rates in Europe.  There is no 
lasting connection between the United States and Europe because 
the economic situations are very different, Sapin declared. (Dil) 
(Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 11 Mar 94 p 25) 
    EDITORIAL ON OECD VIEWS ON FRENCH INTEREST RATES--In an 
editorial in LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES, editor-in-chief Philippe Labarde 
claims that the recent report by the OECD, which advocated 
unilateral French interest rate reductions as the only way to 
sustain demand in France if German rates did not decline, was 
"priceless" as a means to resuscitate the debate on French 
monetary policy.  Despite the hard line taken by the Bank of France 
and Prime Minister Edouard Balladur in support of continuing its 
close monetary coordination with Germany, Labarde notes that the 
critics of such a policy are increasing.  Numerous economists and 
heads of companies are adding their voices to that of the OECD. 
Labarde argues that the OECD, as a bastion of free market orthodoxy, 
gives credence to these "partisans of a French offensive monetary 
policy."  Before the OECD report, these critics were considered at 
best as "sorcerers apprentices or dreamers," at worst as secret 
devaluationists, notorious anti-Europeanists, or shameful 
protectionists." 
    The OECD statement, however, may not lead to monetary 
authorities changing their policy, Labarde cautions.  The government 
has already missed two occasions which would have allowed it freedom 
from the Bundesbank: the first was when it was elected and the 
second during last August's monetary crisis.  Labarde concludes that 
while it is never too late to change monetary direction and that 
economic recovery would be helped by a significant lowering of 
discount rates, he acknowledges that current political and monetary 
conditions make it difficult to do so. (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES in French 10 Mar 94 p 32) 
    EDITORIAL ON GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES--Deputy editor-in-chief 
Francois Roche, writing in the Paris business daily LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES, observes that government subsidies for public companies 
are expensive for France but that the "real" problem of France's 
public companies, especially the computer company Bull and Air 
France, is that they have been mismanaged for a long time.  Roche 
notes that some would find it "scandalous" that Bull is receiving 7- 
8 billion francs (Fr) and Air France Fr20 billion from the French 
Government.  He characterizes such government assistance as "at the 
limit of decency" in the opinion of many, coming at a time when 
private companies are taking risks to find their own financial 
resources in the market place.  He claims the distortion it causes 
in competition is "too flagrant" not to "set right." 
    However, Roche states that the cause for Bull's and Air France's 
financial problems lies with long-term government mismanagement. 
These two companies have never been managed as they have should have 
been, that is to say, as part of a competitive free market.  Their 
directors have never been able to cut themselves off, even when they 
wanted to, from larger political issues.  Moreover, the government, 
when it harbored "great ambitions" in data processing or air 
transport, never furnished these two companies with the financial 
means to fulfill these "grandiose" projects.  Roche concludes that 
Bull and Air France, which have been sheltered from the realities of 
the world in an attempt to make them the "guarantors of national 
independence," are now at the "end of their rope."  Roche adds that 
while it is understandable that the new directors of these companies 
do not want to deal with the consequences of past mismanagement, 
waiting for them to come to grips with their problems wastes money, 
energy, and demoralizes employees. 
(DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 11 Mar 94 p 40) 
    DASSAULT ASKS ASSEMBLY TO STOP RAFALE DELAYS--In a plea to the 
members of the National Assembly defense commission on 1 March, 
Dassault Aviation Chairman Serge Dassault asked that the Rafale 
fighter aircraft program no longer be delayed.  "The survival of the 
group is linked to three factors," he said, "The Rafale program, 
innovative future projects, and civilian and military aircraft 
exports."  The Rafale program was last delayed for six months at the 
end of 1993 and resulted in the loss of 1,000 jobs, half of them in 
the Dassault group.  Serge Dassault pointed out that under present 
conditions, the Ministry of Defense foresees that "very few" Rafale 
aircraft will be delivered before the end of the decade.  (RM) 
(Paris LE MONDE in French 4 Mar 94 p 10) 
    ROOTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT VIEWED--In the Paris daily LE QUOTIDIEN DE 
PARIS, Economist Michel Drancourt notes that there is a "French 
cultural exception" with regard to the causes of unemployment.  As 
early as the 1970's, the Europeans, and notably the French, chose to 
increase the salaries and social benefits of workers, despite 
periodic economic crises, and to finance growing unemployment by 
steadily increasing workers wages and thus employer social 
contributions.  Drancourt remarks that such a "revenues policy" must 
be revised in favor of an "employment policy."  He suggests the 
French could learn from the U.S. system, which he notes is "more 
efficient," with job creation increasing because productivity 
increases faster than do wages. 
    Drancourt does not recommend "systematically reducing" salaries 
but proposes that they should be linked to productivity.  The high 
cost of salaries, he argues, has limited companies chances to 
increase productivity.  In playing the role of provider, the state 
caused a systematic reduction in employment in both large and small 
companies.  The growth in unemployment, however, did not result in 
lower salaries.  Drancourt lays the blame on social benefit costs, 
which are rising faster than direct salaries because they pay for 
redistribution of capital which does not promote job creation. 
"Rigidity should be dismantled," Drancourt contends, and real 
salaries should be adjusted according to productivity.  This entails 
an adjustment in social benefit costs and their financing--a 
difficult but necessary solution, Drancourt concludes.  (RM)  (Paris 
LE QUOTIDIEN DE PARIS in French 3 Mar 94 p 
4) 
    U.S. 'PRESSURE' DIVIDES EU ON NAVAL CONSTRUCTION--A debate is 
beginning in Brussels on the position it should adopt in the last 
round of OECD negotiations on naval construction subsidies.  EU 
shipbuilders fear that the EU Commission will only adopt a 
"minimalist" position in the face of U.S. retaliatory threats, 
according to an article in the Paris business daily LES 
ECHOS.  The naval shipbuilders union (CSCN) claimed that EU 
negotiators want an agreement at any cost even if it is an 
inequitable one and shipbuilders fear they will lose the little 
protection they now have.  However, the terms of the agreement which 
EU negotiators were prepared to accept could be modified under 
French Government pressure, the article contends, because 
France is "sharply opposed" to the EU "minimalist" position. 
    The EU position, which was also criticized by Spain, Belgium, 
and Italy, would abolish as of 1 January 1995 aide to naval 
construction and aid to shipowners linked to naval construction. 
Japanese subsidies to its shipbuilding industry, however, would be 
examined to find out if it distort the market, but the results from 
such an examination would not be ready for several years.  No 
safeguards have been provided in case of "monetary dumping."  The 
United States could continue, at least for a while, numerous 
protectionist measures, especially those contained in the Jones Act, 
which stipulates ships must be built in the United States and keeps 
foreign builders from participating in a $1.5-billion market, 
according to a CSCN study.  In addition to the United States 
protecting its shipbuilders in the civilian market at a time when 
military orders have decreased, the United States is also providing 
$2 billion a year for shipyards to convert to civilian work.  The 
article concludes that the United States has entered the 
final round of OECD negotiations by brandishing the threat of 
retaliation if an agreement is not reached because they are "certain 
of their right, or at least their power, [to do so]." (DiI)  (Paris 
LES ECHOS in French 10 Mar 94 p 
12) 
    GERMANY 
    COMMENTATORS VIEW JOBS SUMMIT--Although German press 
commentators generally agreed that the recent G-7 Jobs Summit 
produced few concrete results, some thought the gathering was 
important as a sign of new international priorities and as an 
opportunity for countries to learn from each other's experiences. 
Writing in the 16 March SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG, Peter De Thier 
complained that the meeting was "rich in symbols and poor in 
content" and that it served "no concrete purpose," except as a 
"glittering self-portrait of the resurgent U.S. economy."  Other 
commentators agreed that the meeting yielded few tangible results 
but noted that it was not expected or intended to.  Gerd 
Brueggemann, for example, pointed dut in DIE WELT of 16 
March that "quick successes were not to be expected," and Josef 
Joffe declared in the same day's SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG that meager 
results were "predictable, because summits rarely produce anything 
that was not put on paper beforehand." 
    Some commentators, however, thought the conference was important 
despite this dearth of concrete achievements.  Carola Kaps, for 
example, argued in the 16 March FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE that "it 
would probably be wrong" to call the summit a "failure," since its 
only objective was to allow the G-7 countries to "learn from one 
another through an intensive exchange of opinions" and "to take home 
new ideas or motivations."  Judged by this standard, she argued, the 
meeting enjoyed at least one "success," since the United States 
seemed to have come away with more understanding and acceptance 
of Germany's reluctance to stimulate its economy.  Kaps, along with 
Joffe, also saw the conference as evidence that the West had changed 
its international economic priorities.  The meeting, both writers 
noted, marked the first time Western leaders had met to discuss 
unemployment, which was previously viewed as too prosaic for their 
attention.  For her part, Kaps believed this change would "send a 
signal" to average citizens that their leaders "are aware of 
people's fears" and of the socially "dangerous" effects 
of a high rate of joblessness.  Joffe, meanwhile, saw the meeting's 
attention to the jobs issue as important "because it enhances the 
shift in awareness" toward the unemployment issue, and because it 
showed that the G-7 recognized the "globalization" of economic 
problems and solutions.  (RoH)  (Munich SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG in 
German 16 Mar 94 pp 4, 28; Berlin DIE WELT in German 16 Mar 94 p 6; 
Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE in German 16 Mar 94 p 
15) 
    ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY SEEN AS CREATING JOBS--In the field of 
environmental technology, Germany is the "undisputed" world champion 
exporter, ahead of the United States and Japan, according to Federal 
Minister of the Environment Klaus Toepfer, who is a member of the 
Christian Democratic Union (CDU).  Speaking at the Leipzig Spring 
Fair, Toepfer presented the following data: 
    --In 1991 (the latest year for which statistics are available) 
Germany captured a 20-percent share of the world environmental 
technology export market, with exports of goods and services 
amounting to 37 billion German marks (DM) or 6 percent of the 
nation's total industrial exports. 
    --Currently, 680,000 German workers are employed in the 
environmental technology industry, a number which could grow to 1 
million by the year 2000. 
    Toepfer interprets the data as evidence that "German 
environmental standards are not the reason for our economic 
problems" but rather a stimulus for growth, given an environmental 
technology market that is "nearly limitless."  Citing an OECD study 
which estimates the volume of potential environmental sales in East 
Europe alone at $15 billion, Toepfer expressed his hope that German 
industry "will make use of its lead in exporting and will not gamble 
away its environmental know-how."  To this end, he intends to 
champion the establishment in Leipzig of an environmental technology 
center with a "special" orientation toward Central and East Europe. 
(JS) (Berlin DIE WELT in German 10 Mar 94 p 14) 
    GOVERNMENTS PUSH SMALL BUSINESS FUNDING--The laender governments 
in eastern Germany are trying to encourage the growth of small- and 
medium-sized businesses through a variety of aid programs. 
Thuringia, for example, is providing funds to new businesses to help 
preserve and create jobs and to assist with sales, trade fairs, 
consulting work, travel, credit guarantees, and direct investments. 
The German Bank of Settlements has extended aid to 
35,000 businessmen in Thuringia, using its roughly DM6 billion in 
seed funds to generate DM9 billion in private investment.  This 
program has preserved or created about 250,000 jobs since 1990, 
notably in the trade and craft sector. 
    Meanwhile, in heavily industrialized Saxony-Anhalt, the land 
government is attempting to stimulate banks to fund small firms' 
needs through credit guarantees and manufacturing subsidies for 
particular products.  The land of Brandenburg claims to have funded 
48,000 small entrepreneurs with DM15.1 billion since 1991 and to 
have more than offset the loss in manufacturing jobs by the increase 
in trade and craft positions.  Finally, the government of 
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern has instituted two new funding mechanisms for 
small businesses, the "capital support program," which provides 
supplemental capital funding, and the "consolidation program," a 
one-time advance to establish liquidity or to refinance loans.  (CW) 
(Duesseldorf HANDELSBLATT in German 10 Mar 94 p 8) 
    NEW SEMICONDUCTOR PLANT OPENS IN EAST--System Microelectronic 
Innovation (SMI), the privatized successor to East Germany's VEB 
Halbleiterwerk of Frankfurt/Oder, is the first European company to 
manufacture silicon-based, superfast bipolar semiconductors.  A new 
DM17-million plant developed by Synergy Semiconductor Corporation, a 
U.S. firm which owns 49 percent of SMI, has just been opened.  SMI 
expects sales of DM33 million in 1994 and estimates selling 50 
percent more in 1995, largely because of sales of the new 
semiconductor, which is based on a Toshiba license.  SMI believes 
the new device will soon account for nearly 50 percent of the its 
output.  Once profitability is reached and investors are found for 
the Trust Agency's remaining stake, Synergy plans to increase its 
share in SMI to 51 percent and foresees a total investment of DM40 
million to develop the German company. 
(CW)  (Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE in German 7 Mar 94 p 
18) 
    BITTERFELD CHEMICAL FACILITIES EXPANDED--The Chemiepark 
Bitterfeld industrial park reports that 178 firms have located in 
its complex--once the center of the East German chemical industry-- 
and that over DM2 billion have been spent on new manufacturing 
facilities and businesses there.  Barely one-half of the complex's 
GDR-era companies have been privatized and some 40 percent of its 
production facilities are shut down and being dismantled. 
Akzo Nobel, a Dutch firm, has just purchased part of a phosphorus 
production company in Bitterfeld from the Trust Agency and plans to 
invest DM50 million by 1996 to establish production lines for fire- 
retardant chemicals. 
    The Eschborn-based Ausimont Deutschland company, a subsidiary of 
Italy's Montedison group, is building a DM140 million hydrogen 
peroxide plant at Bitterfeld and expects to produce 40,000 tons of 
the chemical per year, yielding revenues in the "high double-digit 
millions."  Chemiepark Bitterfeld's manufacturing branch reports 
that the complex's inorganic chemicals and dyestuffs facilities are 
still not privatized but that negotiations for sale of the pesticide 
production facilities are progressing. (CW)  (Frankfurt/Main 
FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE in German 3 Mar 94 p 19) 
    GREECE 
    CIVIL SERVICE 'INFLATION' NOTED--According to Fotini Kalliri 
writing in the 3 March Athens daily I KATHIMERINI, "the thoughtless 
hiring policy" of both the New Democracy (ND) and the Panhellenic 
Socialist Movement (PASOK) governments in recent years has resulted 
in a "ponderous, costly, and submissive" civil service, which 
presently numbers  about 700,000 workers.  For a population of 10 
million, that is one civil servant for every 14 inhabitants.  Total 
figures have steadily risen: 53,914 in 1972, 100,955 in 1980, and 
589,386 in 1988.  Salary and pension costs have risen from 1,858.3 
billion drachmas in 1992 to 2,040 billion drachmas in 1993 and are 
projected to reach 2,272.6 billion in 1994.  (RM)  (Athens I 
KATHIMERINI in Greek 3 Mar 94 p 6) 
    GREEK-ROMANIAN ECONOMIC RELATIONS--A Greek-Romanian Chamber of 
Commerce was recently established in Athens by a number of Greek 
companies, with a Salonica and a Budapest branch expected soon, 
aimed at intensifying commercial and industrial relations between 
the two countries.  Between January and October 1993, Greek exports 
to Romania dropped to $73.9 million from the 1992 mark of $97.8 
million.  A simultaneous drop was reported in Romanian exports to 
Greece, which declined from $46.7 million in a 10-month 
period in 1992 to $43 million in the same period in 1993. (RM) 
(Athens TO VIMA TIS KIRIAKIS in Greek 6 Mar 94 p D31) 
    ENERGY POLLUTION TAXES ASSESSED--According to a study by 
Ministry of National Economy experts, the EU Commission wants to 
levy a general energy and carbon dioxide environmental tax during 
the Greek EU presidency.  The study claims' the burden of such a tax 
on Greece is "significant," and will: 
    *  Increase the inflation rate by 1 percent a year. 
    *  Decrease private investment by 2.5 percent a year. 
    *  Decrease GDP by 0.5 percent. 
    *  Decrease employment by 0.5 percent. 
    *  Increase cost of electricity.  (RM) 
(Athens I KATHIMERINI in Greek 1 Mar 94 p 21) 
    ITALY 
    LABOR MINISTER DISCUSSES BLACK MARKET LABOR--At an informal EU 
meeting on labor held in Athens on 10 March, Labor Minister Gino 
Giugni discussed a white paper prepared by the Italian Government on 
unemployment.  The paper, which identified most of the 2.5 million 
unemployed as women, youths with little education, and southerners, 
also said that the 2.5 million unemployed is paralleled by the 
"totally Italian anomaly" of black market labor involving 2.4 
million people.  According to Giugni this figure was derived by 
studying the following factors: Italy's extremely high propensity 
for saving, the unusual ratio of the self-employed to employed 
workers, the low participation of women in the "official" job 
market, and "an otherwise unexplainable general ability for the 
public to continue purchasing government bonds."  The white paper 
concludes that the extent of the underground economy will make it 
very difficult for Italy's next government to bring the "value" of 
Italian labor up to that of the rest of Europe by increasing the 
number of the "officially employed," thereby guaranteeing 
increased tax revenues and social welfare benefits. 
    The white paper also details the government's program to create 
1 million new jobs by the year 2000 by raising GDP at least 3 
percent yearly, raising the mandatory school age to 16 and later to 
18, increasing flexible forms of employment, legalizing many of 
those forms to bring many of the "underground" jobs into the system, 
and encouraging part-time work to make it a truly competitive form 
of labor. (AB)  (Milan IL SOLE-24 ORE in Italian 11 Mar 94 
pp 1, 13) 
    RECENT LABOR ACCORDS SEEN AS STOPGAP MEASURES--The recently 
concluded labor agreements between the labor unions and Fiat, 
Olivetti, and Italtel, which were concluded thanks to Labor Minister 
Gino Giugni's intervention, are considered to be mere stopgap 
measures that will cost the government billions of lire and will not 
solve the long-term problem of unemployment.  Originally, the three 
companies had asked to be allowed to lay off 11,150 workers. 
Fearing social unrest, the government came up with a plan that 
would allow most of those workers to be retained under "solidarity 
contracts."  These contracts stipulate that the employees would work 
reduced hours and the government would make up 75 percent of the 
lost pay. 
    However, while these measures are designed to preserve the 
workers' jobs and salaries, they are temporary measures that will 
have to be renegotiated soon unless the economy rapidly improves. 
Former union leader and current director of personnel at Italtel 
Luciano Scalia said that unemployment is structural in nature and 
unless the work force is reduced, the problem will return as early 
as December 1995.  At present, it is impossible to assess precisely 
the cost to the government because to do so requires detailed 
information is needed about the age, salary, and seniority of each 
employee--something which is not readily available.  General 
estimates, however, place the total cost to the government at 2.1 
trillion lire. (AB)  (Milan IL MONDO in Italian 28 Feb-7 Mar pp 34- 
35) 
    ENI'S PLANS TO EXPAND EAST--The National Hydrocarbons 
Corporation's (ENI) planned reorganization to prepare for the 
eventual privatization of its two main groups--energy and chemicals- 
-includes expanding its activities in the former Soviet republics of 
Central Asia, Russia, and China, according to ENI's General Manager 
Franco Bernabe in an interview published in Milan's CORRIERE DELLA 
SERA.  Bernabe explained that the changes taking place within 
ENI are intended to correct the overly ambitious expansion plans of 
its former management--involved in corruption and kickback scandals- 
-which led ENI into "tremendous" debt.  The current plans are to 
sell off at least 80 of ENI's subsidiaries, keeping ENI's energy and 
chemical companies.  In the meantime, ENI is planning to go from an 
international conglomerate operating primarily in the Middle East 
and western Africa, to a multinational entity focusing primarily on 
the energy field that will expand as far east as Siberia and China. 
Bernabe said ENI will not decrease its presence in the Middle East 
and western Africa, as 80 percent of Italy's oil reserves are 
located there. 
    Bernabe said that Russia, Kazakhstan, and the Caspian Sea hold 
tremendous mineral reserves, and ENI is involved in large-scale 
projects in those areas either alone or in joint ventures.  In 
China, ENI will not only pursue mineral exploration there but hopes 
to participate in refining crude oil and its distribution.  (AB) 
(Milan CORRIERE DELLA SERA in Italian 7 Mar p 19) 
   NORWAY 
    RECORD EXPORT YEAR REPORTED--While Norwegian imports increased 
in 1993 by 5.6 percent, exports had a record year, according to a 
report published by the Norwegian Export Council in late January 
1994.  Total exports increased in value by 4.6 percent to 316.8 
billion Norwegian kroner.  The greatest increase was in oil and 
natural gas (6.8 percent), while traditional exports from the 
mainland increased by 3.8 percent in value.  Fish exports increased 
by 8 percent in 1993, making that industry Norway's third largest. 
    The rise in exports is due to greater Norwegian competitiveness 
and strong growth in foreign markets, the report stated.  Germany 
replaced the Nordic countries as Norway's most important export 
market in 1993 with the UK as the second most important.  Exports to 
the UK increased by 20 percent in 1993.  The export of construction 
materials to the UK quintupled from 1992 to 1993.  Additionally, 
exports to Japan, China, and the Far East grew strongly in 1993. 
(TF)  (Oslo AFTENPOSTEN in Norwegian 26 Jan 94 p 22) 
    PENSION FUND CALLED 'PROFITABLE BUSINESS'--The agency charged 
with investing National Pension Fund revenues had a "boom year" in 
1993, according to an article in the Oslo daily AFTENPOSTEN.  The 
Fund's operating costs, which are only a minute fraction of its 
income, are covered by only one day's income, according to General 
Manager Tore Lindholt.  The rest is profit, he added.  In 1993, the 
Fund had profits of almost 14.9 billion kroner, or more than 1 
billion kroner for each member of the Fund's 13-person staff, 
prompting AFTENPOSTEN to call the Fund "Norway's most profitable 
business." 
    The Fund increasingly acts as lender to the Norwegian state and 
has become one of the leading actors on the Oslo Stock Exchange, 
having placed 8.5 percent of its capital in stocks there.  The Fund 
is also seeking permission from the government to invest 10 percent 
of its capital abroad.  (TF)  (Oslo AFTENPOSTEN in Norwegian 8 Feb 
94 p 27) 
    SWEDISH BANK PREDICTS GROWTH FOR NORWAY, DENMARK--Norway and 
Denmark are identified by economists at Sweden's Handelsbanken as 
being among the European countries that will experience the greatest 
growth in 1994.  The economies of Sweden and Finland are also 
expected to grow, following the worst recession in those countries 
since the depression of the 1930's.  As a whole, the Nordic region 
is expected to lead in growth in Europe. 
    The strong growth predicted for Denmark and Norway is attributed 
to increased domestic demand and, in Denmark's case, to several 
years of austere fiscal policies and a surplus in foreign trade. 
Norway's GDP is expected to rise by 3 percent in 1994 and 3.5 
percent in 1995 according to the Handelsbanken report. (TF)  (Oslo 
AFTENPOSTEN in Norwegian 17 Feb 94 p 26) 
   1993 PROFITABLE FOR MOST BUSINESSES--The annual reports of 
Norway's major industrial, shipping, and banking firms indicate 
moderate to fast growth in profits for 1993.  According to an 
article in the Oslo daily AFTENPOSTEN, the total growth in profits 
after taxes for these firms was 70 percent.  The growth trend of 
these companies--Den norske Bank (DnB), Statoil, metals 
exporter Elkem, food manufacturer Rieber, pharmacological products 
exporter Hafslund Nycomed, shipping giant Bergesen--are viewed by 
chief analyst Sigmund Ellingsen of DnB Funds as typical of the 
entire commercial sector.  He feels the growth will only continue. 
To a considerable extent this growth is attributed to the cut in 
costs which has made Norwegian industry more competitive 
internationally.  However, while this increased competitiveness 
boosted exports in 1993, it also increased unemployment.  (TF) 
(Oslo AFTENPOSTEN in Norwegian 11 Feb 94 p 27) 
    NEW OIL DRILLING PLANNED--The Ministry of Industry and Energy 
has opened up several new fields on the Norwegian Shelf for explore 
for oil.  The ministry will allow a maximum of six drillings off the 
Nordland coast and four drillings in the Skagerrak.  Responding to 
criticism from environmental organizations and fishermen, Industry 
and Energy Minister Jens Stoltenberg noted that if oil is found, any 
development of the wells would not start until the year 2010 and 
that in any case, the country's best fishing areas are not in the 
area proposed for exploration.  He added that Norway has "30 
years' experience in guarding the coexistence of the oil and 
fisheries industries." (TF)  (Oslo AFTENPOSTEN in Norwegian 25 Feb 
94 p 21) 
    COMPETITIVENESS OF NORWEGIAN SHELF ASSESSED--A report 
commissioned by the Ministry of Industry and Energy on the future 
competitiveness of the Norwegian Shelf states that costs in the oil 
industry will have to be cut in half in the future.  It also 
concludes that the oil industry's taxes and fees must be made more 
predictable for the industry to compete.  The report says that 
controlling costs is the industry's most important task, suggesting 
that projects currently planned should cut costs by 25-30 percent. 
    The report states that the North Sea and the Norwegian Shelf are 
no longer the most attractive areas for oil companies to explore. 
This is in large measure because new, more competitive oil fields 
have emerged in Asia, Africa, and the former Soviet Union, according 
to the report, which was written by representatives of the Norwegian 
Government, the oil companies, and the delivery industry.  (TF) 
(Oslo AFTENPOSTEN in Norwegian 17 Feb 94 p 
27) 
    SWEDEN 
    SWEDISH CONTRIBUTION TO EU BUDGET CALCULATED--The Finance 
Ministry has calculated that Sweden's net contribution to the EU 
budget will be 8.9 billion kronor in 1995--potentially the first 
year of membership--then rise to 11.7 the next year and total about 
18 billion by 1999, when the transition period for budget payments 
is complete.  The total sum for 1995 is expected to be 18.3 billion 
but from this is deducted 5 billion in agricultural and regional 
support and an additional 4.4 billion in rebates.  For 1996, these 
figures will be 19.1 billion total, 3.5 in subsidies, and 3.9 
billion in rebates.  Sweden will receive an additional 7.6 billion 
kronor per year in agricultural support that will not be counted in 
the state budget.  It can also receive a maximum of 1.8 billion in 
environmental support, if it spends the same amount domestically. 
Under the framework of joint programs, Sweden can also expect to 
receive one-half to one billion kronor in subsidies for research and 
development, culture, and youth, according to the Finance Ministry 
report.  (WS)  (Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 4 Mar 94 p C2) 
    ECONOMIC BRIEFS 
    France 
    --EMIRATES NEWS reports France's Giat Industries has annulled 
contract with French Offset partners group.  company wants to revise 
compensation program linked to Leclerc tank sales to United Arab 
Emirates. (LE FIGARO 17 Mar 94 p 1) 
    Greece 
    --Government to "finally" tax gambling, most heavily on 
establishments masquerading as coffee houses...one-sixth of taxes to 
be paid at time of licensing, rest in five bimonthly payments. 
revenues may reach 10 billion drachmas yearly. (TO VIMA TIS KIRIAKIS 
6 Mar 94 p D12) 
    Norway 
    State-Owned Statoil considering start-up operations in eight new 
gas, oil fields on Norwegian Shelf...operations to begin in 1994-95. 
(AFTENPOSTEN 5 Feb 94 p 24) 
    Anilla B. (703-733-6283), Roger B. (703-733-6508), Thale F. 
(703-733-6294), Robert H. (703-733-6504), Dian I. (703-733-6286), 
Rosa M. (703-733-6287), Joel S. (703-733-6503), Wendy S. (703-733- 
6506), and Charles W. (703-733-6473) contributed to this Foreign 
Media Survey. 
ELAG/24MAR/ECONF/WED/CL 24/2227Z MAR 
</TEXT>
</DOC>
