<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-26 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000013594001" </HT>
<HEADER>
<DATE1>   11 March 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
FOUO -- DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS, THE 
FOLLOWING ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS 
Document Type:FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--WEST EUROPE 
<H3> <TI>      FOREIGN PRESS SURVEY--FB PSE 94-010--WEST EUROPE </TI></H3>
</HEADER>
<TEXT>
Europe     Economic Review:  WESTERN EUROPE Vol. III, No. 10, 
10 March 1994 
   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a series published by 
FBIS Europe/Latin America Group featuring brief summaries of foreign 
media reports on topical issues, compiled from the most recent 
sources available to FBIS. 
   Europe Economic Review (EER) is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA 
SURVEY published by the West and East European Divisions of 
Europe/Latin America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas 
bureaus.  The EER is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Report for West and East Europe, 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear in other FBIS publications. The EER is published in two 
editions, one for Western Europe (also including media coverage of 
Canada and Turkey), and the other for Eastern Europe.  Drawing 
primarily from domestic media sources of these countries but also 
using other foreign media where appropriate, the EER focuses on 
national and regional economic issues, such as economic 
competitiveness, regional economic integration, economic reforms and 
other changes in economic policies, and foreign trade and 
investment. 
   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government.  All comment or analysis contained herein is 
attributable to the cited media source, unless otherwise indicated. 
   TABLE OF CONTENTS 
   FEATURES: 
   France--Reaction to 'Super 301,' Fish Import Controversy 
   FINLAND 
   Study Finds Job Training Succeeding 
   FRANCE 
   Balladur Moderates CIP Provisions; Employers Stay Out of CIP 
Debate; INSEE Backs Off Employment Study Conclusions; Banks Use 
Frozen Iraqi Funds To Pay Creditors; Aerospatiale Wants EU Aid To 
Fight U.S. Competition; EIB To Loan France More Than Fr15 Million; 
Longuet Discusses Textile Aid; Winners of Balladur Economics Listed; 
Conze Concentrates Weapons Production in Cher; 
   GERMANY 
   Germans Outpace Japanese in Productivity; French-German Refinery 
Deal in Trouble; Hermes Insurance for Russian Railcar Sales; 
Economist Says Germany Missed Long-Term Growth Cycle; Jobless Rate, 
Policies Compared to Weimar Republic; Part-Time Employment 
Attracting Attention; Rexrodt Sees Mexico as 'Bridgehead' to 
Americas 
   ITALY 
   PDS Presents Economic Program 
   PORTUGAL 
   Telecommunications Merger Approved 
   SPAIN 
   Controversy Surrounds Government Pensions; Labor Reform Includes 
Review of Disability Benefits; BBV President on Possible Banesto 
Takeover; Congress Designates Special Committee for Banesto 
   SWEDEN 
   Study Sees Job Growth Confined to Industrial Sector; Volvo Seen 
Seeking Project-by-Project Partnerships 
   ECONOMIC BRIEFS 
   France 
   FEATURE 
   France: Reaction to 'Super 301,' Fish Import Controversy 
   Super 301 Trade Legislation 
   Recent French commentary and reporting on the decision by 
President Bill Clinton to revive "Super 301" trade retaliation 
legislation to pressure Japan into opening its markets to U.S. goods 
has been mostly critical of the U.S. decision and has expressed fear 
over its effect on the completion of the final version of the GATT 
Uruguay Round agreement in Marrakesh on 12-15 April.  An article in 
the 7 March LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES stated that the revival of Super 
301 "can only add to the difficulties faced by the (EU) Twelve in 
speaking with one voice in Marrakesh..."  However, the 7 March LA 
TRIBUNE DESFOSSES article pointed out that "in Brussels, as in other 
capitals, everyone is convinced that (President) Clinton's decision 
is targeted to intimidate only Japan," not the EU. 
   French press reporting also contained the following official 
statements, most of which were also critical of the United States. 
For example: 
   * GATT Director Peter Sutherland:  Sutherland was quoted as 
saying the U.S. action is "a new effort in bilateral trade, which is 
about to test the results obtained in the Uruguay Round before they 
are even implemented."  (LIBERATION 4 Mar 94)  "The concept of 
managed trade constitutes a dangerous and unfortunate notion.  When 
bureaucrats interfere (in trade), the potential of risks increases." 
(LE FIGARO 4 Mar 94) 
   * Prime Minister Edouard Balladur:  "Happy to get rid of the 
label of bad boy of world trade," Balladur stated that the Super 301 
decision "completely validates the French position that one cannot 
have a system of free trade where each country creates its own 
justice." (LIBERATION 5, 6 Mar 94)  "It is the negation of an 
international free trade system, which is what we have always said 
it was." (LE FIGARO 5, 6 Mar 94)  Balladur, criticizing U.S. 
"threats" against France as a "breach of the rules of the game," 
declared, "It is proof that we are right to ask for the suppression 
of Super 301.  If we do not, the Uruguay Round agreement will only 
be hot air." (LES ECHOS 7 Mar 94) 
   Despite the negative comments by these officials, the press did 
report a more positive assessment: 
   * EU Officials:  An article in LIBERATION claims that while 
officials in the EU are declaring that they are hostile to the U.S. 
unilateral approach on trade with Japan, in private "some officials" 
understand U.S. "aggravation," acknowledging that the United States 
"had first tried everything, all in vain."  The article cites one of 
these unnamed official sources as saying, "This (Super 301) affair 
may threaten to deteriorate the climate of trust a bit more, 
especially in financial markets.  But, if it ends in the Japanese 
making a gesture, in them launching a real budgetary effort to 
stimulate domestic demand, then Europe will profit from it." 
(LIBERATION 4 March 94) 
   U.S.-France Fish Dispute 
   The press also noted coUents on the U.S.-France dispute over 
U.S. fish imports to France, on which France had imposed strict 
inspection regulations, prompting the United States to propose 
retaliation against French cheese.  An editorial in the 7 March LA 
TRIBUNE DESFOSSES stated that the United States "threatened" 
retaliation because "the Clinton administration has acted under 
pressure from the National Fisheries Institute and the shipowners' 
lobby, arguing that Massachusetts fishermen were losing $200,000 a 
week because of the restrictions on Fish imports imposed by France." 
The press also reported the following official comments: 
   * Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's Staff:  Viewing the 
retaliation threat as an indication of a tougher U.S. trade policy, 
Balladur's staff contended, "If the United States is stepping up the 
pressure on international trade, it is to cast doubt on the Uruguay 
Round's main achievement, which their Senate refuses to consider: 
the institutionalization of a World Trade Organization." (LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES 7 Mar 94) 
   Foreign Minister Alain Juppe:  "Our decision (regarding fish 
imports) conformed perfectly with the applicable Community 
regulations.  If the United States engages in retaliatory measures 
against France, they will be responsible for an escalation (of trade 
tensions) just when we are preparing for the Marrakesh 
conference....  One should ask if this would be a good signal."  (LE 
FIGARO 5, 6 Mar 94) (DiI) 
   FINLAND 
   STUDY FINDS JOB TRAINING SUCCEEDING--According to a recent study, 
the national adult vocational training program has been enjoying 
some success in the greater Helsinki region.  The study, conducted 
in Uusimaa Province Labor District, which includes the densely 
populated Helsinki region, found that one of every three district 
trainees finds a job within two months of leaving the program.  Kari 
Kiuru, writing in the 25 February HELSINGIN SANOMAT, claims much of 
the program's success is due to its flexibility in responding to job 
market changes.  Officials constantly monitor these changes and 
solicit suggestions from industry on, for example, training programs 
which could fit the needs of laid-off workers.  New or expanded 
courses, however, cannot always keep up with rapid changes in 
student demands.  The boom in the export sector, for example, has 
led to a recent surge of applications for relevant training:  200 
people applied for just 20 available spaces this year. 
   In 1994, Uusimaa District will receive 163 million markkas, which 
will allow it to accept 12,000 students, or about one-tenth of the 
the area's unemployed.  The district will offer a wide variety of 
training opportunities, covering about 100 job fields and divided 
into some 800 separate courses.  Training lasts anywhere from one 
month to as much as an entire year.  (RB) 
   (In the hard copy version of West Europe Economic Review, there 
is a graph depicting the "Participation Distribution of Vocational 
Training in Uusimaa.") 
   FRANCE 
   BALLADUR MODERATES CIP PROVISIONS--Faced with mounting criticism 
from labor unions and student demonstrations, Prime Minister Edouard 
Balladur has made "important" concessions to change the new 
Professional Insertion Contract (CIP), a measure which has been 
denounced by labor, student, and opposition forces as a 
discriminatory "Youth Minimum Wage."  According to Delphine Girard 
writing in the 4 March LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES, Balladur made these 
concessions to calm the "social tempest" he created in approving a 
law to implement the CIP, which originally would have allowed 
employers to hire those under 26 years of age--even those with a 
junior college degree--for 80 percent of France's guaranteed minimum 
wage (SMIC) and would have required that the company provide a 
mentor "to help the new employee to begin his career."  Balladur has 
agreed to "redefine" the CIP, stating that mentors must provide real 
training within the company."  He has also replaced the provision 
allowing junior college hirees to be paid at 80 percent of the SMIG 
with the stipulation they must be paid instead at 80 percent of the 
"conventional minimum wage" of the industry, which cannot be below 
the regular SMIC.  Those with no degree, however, may still be hired 
at the below-minimum-wage rate. 
   Balladur's concessions were made not only under pressure from 
labor, students, and opposition groups but also from members of his 
own governing coalition.  An article in the 3 March LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES reported that former Prime Minister Jacques Chirac entered 
the debate, having declared "a Youth Minimum Wage is an ill-adapted 
way to solve unemployment," bringing with it "important 
inconveniences."  An article in the 4, 5 March LES ECHOS noted that 
Chirac had added, "If we allow companies to hire young people with a 
salary less than the SMIC, the difference must be counterbalanced by 
real training in the company..."  The UDF Youth Movement also made 
public its objection to Balladur's choice of fighting youth 
unemployment, asking him to "review his options."  The president of 
the finance committee of the National Assembly, Jacques Barrot, 
contended that "the text of the implementation law on CIP is not 
satisfactory," and that the tutorial obligations of companies using 
the CIP must be better defined.  He also said that "more detailed 
coordination on the strategies taken toward junior college graduates 
is needed." 
   Despite Balladur relenting to these pressures and subsequently 
redefining the CIP provisions, the labor unions are not convinced he 
has gone far enough, Girard continues in the 4 March LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES.  The unions still refuse to support what they insist on 
calling the "Youth Minimum Wage" for those with no college 
education, to which Balladur responded, "Better this than nothing at 
all."  Workers Force (FO) head Marc Blondel declared, "Tensions will 
continue.  We still disagree with the prime minister's proposals." 
French Democratic Confederation of Labor (CFDT) secretary general, 
Nicole Notat, claims the government is trying to appear to relent on 
the issue "without relenting." (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in 
French 4 Mar 94 p 2; 3 Mar 94 p 4; Paris LES ECHOS in French 4, 5 
Mar 94 p 2) 
   EMPLOYERS STAY OUT OF CIP DEBATE--The controversy that has 
embroiled the government and the labor unions over the CIP is not 
regarded as such by employers, according to an article in LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES.  Employers state that "there either are jobs or there are 
no jobs."  Employing more workers depends above all on business 
activity and that "this type of measure (the CIP) can only serve to 
plug holes where personnel are needed for six or eight months," or 
until the economy picks up.  However, the article claims employers 
view the CIP as "rather positive," noting that apprenticeship 
contracts have worked well and that the idea of lowering the wage 
cost is nothing new.  The danger, according to employers, is that 
the CIP is becoming too politicized and is too associated with a 
Youth Minimum Wage.  As for the fears that the young will take jobs 
away from the more experienced, the article cites statements from 
staff members at the Vallourec company as saying, "It is a false 
problem since a company is always tempted to do just that.  The CIP 
would change nothing."  Other employers pointed out that they prefer 
a more long-term hiring policy and that in any case, companies are 
looking for workers with at least a junior college education rather 
than those with no advanced education. (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES in French 7 Mar 94 p 6) 
   INSEE BACKS OFF EMPLOYMENT STUDY CONCLUSIONS--The National 
Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE) has modified 
the conclusions of a study it conducted with the Bureau of 
Information and Economic Forecasting (BIPE) on the impact on 
employment of either a reduction in employer's social welfare costs 
or a reduction in youth wages.  The study, ordered by the Senate 
when the five-year law on employment was being considered, reported 
(see West Europe Economic Survey Special Report, Vol III, No 7, 24 
Feb 94) to have established a much sharper macroeconomic effect on 
employment when employer social charges were reduced (almost 300,000 
supplemental jobs in the medium term) than would establishing a 
"Youth Minimum Wage" (almost 150,000 more jobs). 
   In a communique released on 2 March, INSEE changed its 
conclusion, explaining that it is not possible to determine a 
precise distinction between the effects of lowering employer costs 
versus lowering youth wages.  (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in 
French 4 Mar 94 p 3) 
   BANKS USE FROZEN IRAQI FUNDS TO PAY CREDITORS--Three large French 
banks--Societe Generale, National Bank of Paris (BNP), and the Union 
of French and Arab Banks (UBAF) have used frozen Iraqi assets to 
compensate the accounts of Iraqi clients without French Treasury 
approval, according to an article in LE NOUVEL ECONOMISTE.  After 
months of investigation, the Finance Ministry has concluded that 
these banks have completed financial operations of several hundreds 
of millions of francs, despite the freeze on Iraqi assets in France 
instituted in August 1990 following the Gulf War.  Economy Minister 
Edmond Alphandery must now set the amount of the fines, which can be 
up to three times the sums in question. 
   The banks, having debited and credited accounts of Iraqi clients, 
reduced their financial exposure on Iraq.  In so doing, they have 
"designated themselves privileged creditors," the article notes. 
Between December 1992 and April 1993, for example, nearly 60 million 
francs (Fr) disappeared from Iraqi accounts at UBAF.  The banks 
argue that the transactions were made in "good faith and in a formal 
manner."  The article points out that some Iraqi creditors were not 
so lucky.  The CED-Viandes and Dumez companies, for example, have 
been trying for two years to recoup money from Iraq and have, 
without success, been trying to serve the banks with seizure notices 
on the Iraqi assets. (DiI)  (Paris LE NOUVEL ECONOMISTE in French 21 
Feb 94 p 38) 
   AEROSPATIALE WANTS EU AID TO FIGHT U.S. COMPETITION--French 
Aircraft and Space Industries Group (GIFAS) President Serge Dassault 
would like the EU to promote--"as (President) Bill Clinton does (for 
U.S. aircraft companies)"--Europe's aircraft industry, according to 
an article in LES ECHOS.  The article claims that the thinking of EU 
officials, meeting currently in Brussels to adopt a couon position 
on the next GATT aircraft industry negotiations, has been "marked" 
by the "intervention" of President Clinton to win the Saudi Airlines 
contract for Boeing and McDonnell Douglas at the expense of the 
Airbus consortium.  The article claims this augurs poorly for 
aircraft industry subsidy negotiations with the United States which, 
according to Dassault "is trying to enclose Europeans in rigid 
regulations to which the United States itself does not conform." 
Aerospatiale President Louis Gallois adds: "We do not have to go 
along with the U.S. game of managing the negotiations.  But, we must 
defend our system of reimbursable advances, which is a good system 
based on the idea of risk sharing.  At the same time, we must also 
prepare to progressively adopt indirect aid, as it is given in the 
United States, in order to have two irons in the fire and to achieve 
a balance between the two systems." (DiI)  (Paris LES ECHOS in 
French 2 Mar 94 p 10) 
   EIB TO LOAN FRANCE MORE THAN FR15 MILLION--According to an 
article in LES ECHOS, the European Investment Bank (EIB) is ready to 
increase its lending if the EU White Paper plan to increase growth 
and employment in Europe requires it.  The bank loaned nearly Fr130 
billion to its target countries in 1993--funds which were raised 
without difficulty on the international markets--and the bank has 
the means to sharply increase its lending, according to bank 
president, Sir Brian Unwin.  "With a financing capacity of 144 
billion ECU's and a total loan portfolio of 98 billion ECU's, the 
bank can do more for Europe's economy," Unwin said. 
   In France, the EIB intends to increase its loans for public 
works, environmental protection, and automobile industry projects. 
Last year the country, which is the fourth largest beneficiary of 
EIB loans after Italy, Spain, and Britain, received Fr14.6 billion 
from the bank, a figure more than 13 percent higher than 1992 and 
which represents 12.4 percent of total  1993 EIB lending.  This 
amount was largely devoted to regional development to reinforce 
economic and social cohesion in Europe, lending which adheres to EIB 
statutory goals.  More than 50 percent of the loans were accorded to 
local projects in "industrial decline" zones or "delayed 
development" areas.  EIB lending for industrial priorities is also 
in line with general EU goals: transportation will receive Fr6.6 
billion for the super fast train, TGV Nord, and the Channel tunnel, 
while the aircraft industry is slated for Fr1.4 billion.  The 
environment will also garner increased support as will the 
automobile industry.  According to unnamed directors of the bank, 
EIB has "a very specific project currently under study which would 
involve French auto makers Peugeot and Renault." (DiI)  (Paris LES 
ECHOS in French 28 Feb 94 p 8) 
   LONGUET DISCUSSES TEXTILE AID--Industry Minister Gerard Longuet, 
speaking at a late February roundtable discussion with textile 
manufacturers, stated that if they had ideas for investment projects 
for their industry they should submit them to the government 
because, "If there are projects, there will be money."  He also 
noted that the government could allocate Fr160 million to textile- 
clothing investments without any requirements linked to employment. 
Such allocations would come from new regional funding approved to 
aid small to medium-sized industries, which in 1994 will amount to 
Fr80O million for various programs.  Additionally, the textile- 
clothing industry will be able to obtain EU funds targeted for 
training, of which France's share is Fr700 million and which is to 
be split among the automobile, electronic, and textile industries. 
These funds, however, are for training in the broader sense, such as 
that for trade certification and data processing technicians and not 
for training related to specific projects.  Longuet repeated that 
while these training funds can generally help textile companies, 
specific "projects are still needed" to generate additional help. 
(DiI)  (Paris LES ECH0S in French l Mar 94 p 8) 
   WINNERS OF BALLADUR ECONOMICS LISTED--Gerard Desportes and 
Nathaniel Herzberg writing in the Paris daily LIBERATION have 
reviewed the results of 10 months of Prime Minister Edouard 
Balladur's administration and has noted that except for the 
education field where Balladur's attempt to help finance private 
schools failed, many groups gained as a result of his economic 
policies.  They are: 
   Small Investors -- Privatizations gave small investors 
opportunities to buy shares of such companies as Rhone-Poulenc, Elf- 
Aquitaine, and National Bank of Paris at a discount price. 
According to the authors, such a discount on these shares amounted 
to a "gift" of Fr5 billion to investors. 
   Farmers -- The authors claim Balladur was "extremely firm" in his 
support for farmers during the GATT negotiations, despite the risk 
of international crisis.  Last May, Balladur granted farmers Fr1.9 
billion to "sweeten" the oil seeds agreement and Fr1.5 billion in 
November to facilitate the passage of the modified Blair House 
agricultural agreement. 
   Small Business -- Balladur temporarily banned the opening of 
large retail stores, a subject of controversy among small business 
owners who face stiff competition from such large stores. 
   Big Business -- To foster employment, Balladur has lowered the 
cost of labor and money, instituted more flexibility in the labor 
code, granted assistance to foundering sectors of the economy, and 
transferred part of the social costs paid by companies to the state 
budget. 
   Doctors --  Private physicians, a group traditionally favorable 
to the Right, have benefited from Balladur's economic policy, which 
raised taxpayers health insurance contributions and lowered the 
number of hospital beds. 
   Civil Servants -- These employees have maintained their 
retirement benefits and purchasing power, unlike the rest of the 
population, which has not only been affected by two "highly 
unpopular" austerity measures to reduce them but have also 
experienced lower private sector salaries. 
   The Press -- Showing "great understanding" for the difficulties 
affecting the press, the Balladur government has repeatedly 
supported modernization in this sector and granted "exceptional" 
assistance, which will total Fr721 million over several years, to 
publications foundering because of the loss of advertising funds. 
Retirees -- The authors contend that this group has benefited 
from Balladur's "greatest coup," which will modify the entire 
retirement system.  This change will be implemented by stages and be 
completed by the year 2003 and temporarily settles the problem of 
the retirement system's deficit. (RM)  (Paris LIBERATION in French 
15 Feb 94 pp 4-5) 
   CONZE CONCENTRATES WEAPONS PRODUCTION IN CHER--Convinced of the 
need to "gather forces," Henri Conze, director general of the 
General Armaments Delegation (DGA), signed an agreement with 
Aerospatiale, Matra Defense, Thomson and Giat-Industrie to create a 
number of jobs in the Cher department, where the weapons industry 
holds 20 percent of all industrial jobs.  Aerospatiale will create 
over 60 jobs before the end of 1995 and 40 more in 1996 in its three 
regional factories: one of which produces spare parts for aircraft, 
the second of which is dedicated to "small missiles," and the third 
of which manufactures ballistic missiles.  Matra Defense will create 
35 new jobs in its local plants, where the air-to-air Mica missiles 
are manufactured.  Some 200 jobs will be created by Thomson and 15 
by Giat-Industrie in the manufacture of various types of munitions. 
The DGA itself will transfer to the Cher department some of its lIe- 
de-France "missions," including the production of powders and 
explosives.  In addition, a weapons specialist will advise the 
region's prefect and a trade mission will promote the region's 
special defense products such as the Eryx missile.  The 
reinforcement of weapons manufacturing in the Cher region should 
ease this industry's budgetary problems and help it save an 
estimated 230,000 jobs. (RM)  (Paris LE QUOTIDIEN DE PARIS in French 
14 Feb 94 p 11) 
   GERMANY 
   GERMANS OUTPACE JAPANESE IN PRODUCTIVITY--In 1993, Germany 
outstripped Japan in industrial productivity for the first time, 
according to a study by Bernd Hof of the Institute of the German 
Economy in Cologne.  According to Hof, Japanese labor productivity, 
measured in terms of real GDP per worker, declined by 1.2 percent in 
1993, compared with only a 0.1 percent drop for Germany.  In fact, 
Hof found that the productivity gap between Japanese and German 
industry continues to widen.  While the recession-related decline in 
production has caused the profits of Japanese companies to "tumble," 
German firms appear to be recovering and making progress, at least 
in cutting costs.  By reducing workforces and increasing 
productivity, the Germans have been able to achieve lower unit wage 
costs and higher profits.  This development also has its darker 
side, however, as evidenced by current unemployment figures and 
fears that, when the next economic upturn comes, the skilled workers 
currently unemployed either will no longer be available or will be 
employable only at "disproportionately" high costs.  The Japanese 
share these fears and are therefore hesitant to lay off permanent 
staff. 
   Hof, arguing that the "real" reason for the decline in Japanese 
productivity is its traditional reluctance to lay off workers, sees 
a "remarkable parallel" in the German automobile industry, with one 
"essential" difference as exemplified by Volkswagen.  Although 
Volkswagen has reduced working hours for its employees by 20 percent 
rather than lay them off, it has benefitted from workers giving up 
12 to 13 percent of their wages.  Consequently, Volkswagen is in a 
better wage-cost position than a Japanese company where workers are 
working fewer hours but drawing full salary. (JS)  (Berlin DIE WELT 
in German 15 Feb 94 p 12) 
   FRENCH-GERMAN REFINERY DEAL IN TROUBLE--Elf Aquitaine, two-thirds 
owner of the privatized Leuna refinery in the Halle-Bitterfeld 
region, is attempting to renegotiate the agreement under which it 
purchased the plant from the Trust Agency.  The agreement calls for 
Elf and its German co-owner, Thyssen Handelsunion (THU) to build a 
new 4.5 billion German marks (DM) refinery with a 10-million- 
ton/year capacity; the Trust Agency is pressing Elf to start 
construction or risk a DM1.5 billion contract penalty and 
cancellation of the sale of the profitable Minol gas station network 
which made the agreement attractive to the French in the first 
place.  Elf is reportedly looking for new investors so that it can 
become a minority shareholder but THU is not interested in 
increasing its share.  Since the original agreement, oil market 
trends have dictated that refinery output be reduced, rather than 
increased, and Elf has begun to privatize some of its own 
operations.  Because Elf's new management is selling stock on the 
market, it wants to avoid risky projects and is citing increased 
competition, declining demand, and flat economic growth in eastern 
Germany as grounds for revising its investment policy.  Guenter 
Rexrodt, German minister of economics, has insisted that Elf begin 
with the agreed upon construction and maintains that Elf cannot 
reduce its holdings by returning shares to the Trust Agency pending 
resale.  Rexrodt has allowed, however that renegotiation of later 
stages of the agreement may be possible, and notes that contacts are 
continuing with other firms, including British Petroleum, which 
showed interest in Leuna during 1992 negotiations.  (CW) 
(Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE in German 2 Mar 94 p 20) 
   HERMES INSURANCE FOR RUSSIAN RAILCAR SALES--Economics Minister 
Guenter Rexrodt has advised the Berlin railcar firm, Deutsche 
Waggonbau (DWA), that he expects DM555 million in Hermes export 
credit guarantees to be available to support the company's 1994 
sales to Russia.  At the same time, however,  the ministry has 
expressed reservations about Russia's ability to meet international 
business standards, which normally dictate making a 15-percent down 
payment on contracts. 
   The recently privatized DWA had requested DM765 million in 
guarantees for the current year but the German Government has cut 
1994 credit guarantees to CIS countries from DM4 billion to DM3.5 
billion, thus limiting guarantees for individual export contracts. 
Consequently, DWA envisions needing more insurance guarantees in 
1995 and 1996.  The 1994 limits, however, do not affect pending 
applications for DM111 million in credit insurance on an existing 
Russian contract and for DM110 million on an order from Kazakhstan. 
(CW)  (Duesseldorf HANDELSBLATT in German 28 Feb 94 p 15) 
   ECONOMIST SAYS GERMANY MISSED LONG-TERM GROWTH CYCLE--According 
to one economist, Germany's failure to abandon outmoded industries 
in favor of the growth sectors of the information age has caused it 
to miss a long-term economic growth cycle and condemned it to a 
lengthy struggle with recession and high unemployment.  Leo Nefiodow 
of the Institute for Mathematics and Data Processing in Sankt 
Augustin contends that Germany has failed to recognize information 
technology as the driving force of the latest in a series of 50-year 
growth cycles.  Instead of encouraging the development of growth 
industries in the information field, Nef iodow argues, Germany has 
continued to subsidize the dying industries of the previous cycle, 
which was characterized by energy-intensive industries like 
automobiles and petrochemicals.  Consequently, those who believe 
renewed German prosperity will come with the next economic upturn 
"will have to wait a long time."  In fact, no upturn will come 
unless the country's economic structure adapts to these underlying 
shifts in the world economy. 
   In Nefiodow's view, other countries--notably Japan--have done a 
better job of riding the latest economic wave.  He notes that only 
one German firm--Siemens-Nixdorf--plays a significant role in the 
information field, while Japan is represented by over 20 companies. 
Nef iodow ascribes Germany's failure to capitalize on the current 
cycle primarily to social and cultural factors.  Germany's emphasis 
on individualism and hierarchical forms of organization, he 
maintains, makes it less able to respond to the demands of the 
information age than Japan, with its stress on group well-being and 
teamwork.  While Nefiodow believes it is too late for Germany to 
catch up, he contends the country may be well positioned to 
anticipate the next one, which he thinks could be driven by the 
information, environmental, and health industries, since Germany has 
high-quality measurement and process control and software and 
systems technologies and a top-flight chemical industry.  Above all, 
however, he emphasizes Germany's high degree of public awareness of 
environmental, health, and information issues.  (RoH)  (Munich 
SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG in German 21 Feb 94 p 20) 
   JOBLESS RATE, POLICIES COMPARED TO WEIMAR REPUBLIC--According to 
commentator Wolfram Engels, the unemployment rate in Germany is 
almost as high today as during the Weimar Republic but the German 
Government, unlike the Weimar Republic, has failed to alleviate the 
situation by reducing the cost of labor.  Engels notes that the 
unemployment rate in February 1932 stood at 19.2 percent and that 
the current rate--counting those in various publicly funded work 
programs and other "hidden" forms of unemployment--has reached 18.2 
percent.  "However," he writes, "that's where the similarity ends." 
Weimar's Chancellor of the Reich Heinrich Bruening, Engels points 
out, reduced the cost of labor from 5.57 million unemployed from 
5.57 million to 4.1 million by August 1933.  A reduction in the cost 
of labor, Engels maintains, would prove similarly effective today, 
with an 8-percent cut in real wages sufficient to produce full 
unemployment.  According to Engels, however, the German Government 
is moving in exactly the opposite direction.  Its new nursing care 
insurance program, he maintains, will "ignite a rocket" of labor 
cost increases.  Engels suggests that the program could increase the 
cost of labor by 6 percent or more within a few years, inevitably 
leading to a further loss of jobs.  (RoH)  (Duesseldorf 
WIRTSCHAFTSWOCHE in German 11 Feb 94 p 150) 
   PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT ATTRACTING ATTENTION--With the number of 
unemployed in Germany at 4 million persons, the idea of expanding 
the part-time work force to alleviate the situation is attracting 
increasing attention.  Cologne's Institute for the German Economy 
(IW) reports that 2.66 million more Germans could be employed if the 
percentage of part-time workers in the labor force were raised from 
the current 15.5 to the 34.3 percent found in the Netherlands. 
Experts note, however, that the service sector would have to be 
significantly expanded and the proportion of working women slightly 
reduced if this adjustment were to succeed.  Calculations show that 
reducing the 22 million-person full-time labor force in Germany by 
2.53 million would add 5.19 million new part-time jobs to the 
existing 4 million.  Various surveys indicate that between 10 and 17 
percent of full-time workers would be willing to accept part-time 
employment, while somewhat lower percentages of unemployed persons 
would be agreeable to part-time work.  As of December, 281,000 
jobless were willing to work part-time but only 32,000 part-time 
jobs were reported available.  (CW)  (Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER 
ALLGEMEINE in German 28 Feb 94 p 15) 
   REXRODT SEES MEXICO AS 'BRIDGEHEAD' TO AMERICAS--Speaking at the 
late February trade fair in Mexico City, Economics Minister Guenther 
Rexrodt described Mexico as a potential "bridgehead" for German 
exports to North and South America.  Rexrodt noted that German 
industry had overlooked the Mexican market during the boom years of 
the 1980's, but had rediscovered its potential since the creation of 
the North Atlantic Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).  German companies 
now hoped, through Mexico, to gain duty-free access to the U.S. 
market.  Rexrodt also pointed out that increasing trade with Germany 
offered an opportunity for Mexico to lessen its dependence on the 
United States, which currently accounts for 70 percent of all 
Mexican foreign trade. 
   German trade with Mexico, which amounts to about DM5 billion, has 
"still not realized its full potential," according to an article in 
the SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG.  By contrast, some progress has been made 
in the field of capital investments.  In 1993 alone, Germans 
invested DM20 billion in Mexico, 10 times more than in 1992. 
Experts expect a similarly high level of investment in 1994. 
According to the article, Mexico's recent trend toward economic 
privatization, coupled with its balanced budget deficit and its 
relatively low 8-percent inflation rate, have created favorable 
conditions for German investors.  In addition, the two countries 
have concluded an agreement to prevent double taxation, although 
they  have yet to sign an investment protection pact.  (RoH) 
(Munich SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG in German 23 Feb 94 p 30) 
   ITALY 
   PDS PRESENTS ECONOMIC PROGRAM--The Democratic Party of the Left 
(PDS) presented its election platform on 15 February.  The platform 
contains a large section on economic reforms and programs which 
advocate the following: 
   * Taxes 
   --Divide revenues equally between the central and local 
governments. 
   --Extend the tax base, reduce individual tax rates. 
   --Remove taxes from Treasury bills since it "serves no purpose" 
and the same result is currently being achieved by lower interest 
rates. 
   --Reduce red tape and accounting procedures. 
   --Abolish local income taxes, health taxes, health benefit 
contributions, and regional double taxation.  Allow individual 
regional and local taxes. 
   --Combine the payment of personal income tax (IRPEF), VAT, social 
security tax, and disability taxes for small companies and have them 
submitted under a single tax return. 
   --Modernize the way tax evasion is fought by accurately 
determining income and expenses. 
   * Employment 
   --Introduce shorter work hours which will increase 
competitiveness on foreign markets. 
   --Support the EU's "Delors plan" for employment but it and the 
quality of life a priority by complementing the plan with "social 
and economic reorganization," including flexibility, part-time 
employment, and paid time off. 
   * Privatizations 
   --Continue Prime Minister Carlo Azeglio Ciampi's privatization 
program, which among other things will bring order to the banking 
system--including savings banks--and ensure change in bank 
leadership. 
   * Finance and Markets 
   --Open markets, which are restricted and dominated by a few 
producers, to institutional investors. 
   --Provide tax incentives for pension, closed-investment, and real 
estate funds.  Pay for profits and transfer payments from these 
funds with shares of stock.  Establish local stock markets and 
guarantee voting rights to small and institutional stockholders. 
   * Southern Policy 
   --Discontinue supporting a "decaying social structure" in 
southern Italy.  Include the south in general national policies. 
Encourage the creation of a network of viable small and medium-sized 
companies in that region. (AB)  (Milan IL SOLE-24 ORE in Italian 16 
Feb 94 p 2) 
   PORTUGAL 
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS MERGER APPROVED--To create a more 
internationally competitive telecommunications group, the council of 
ministers approved the April merger of the Telecom Portugal, Lisbon 
and Porto Telephones (TLP), and Teledifusora of Portugal (TDP) 
companies, which will form a single company under the name of 
Portugal Telecom.  Moreover, the government will soon hold 
negotiations with the Marconi company to discuss its anticipated 
merger into the new "giant" corporation.  Portugal Telecom will be 
ready for the privatization of about 30 percent of its capital by 
the end of the year.  The government estimates that it will earn 120 
million contos from the privatization process.  (RM)  (Lisbon DIARIO 
DE NOTICIAS NEG0CIOS in Portuguese 18 Feb 94 p 2) 
   SPAIN 
   CONTROVERSY SURROUNDS GOVERNMENT PENSIONS--Concerned about 
skyrocketing  pension costs, Finance Minister Pedro Solbes warned 
Spanish workers "in their forties" that they may not receive their 
pensions if the current system is maintained, according to an 
article in the Madrid daily EL PAlS on 22 February.  In so doing, he 
elicited strong political reactions from his own party, the Spanish 
Socialist Workers Party (PSOE) and opposition groups.  The article 
noted that the Spanish pension system, which is administered and 
funded by the government, increased spending 73.5 percent during 
1989-93 and that forecasts indicate a 20 percent increase by 1997. 
However, Solbes publicly reassured workers that the system could 
still pay benefits but not over the long term.  He attributed this 
problem to an aging population, longer life expectancy, fewer 
contributors, and more annuitants.  Solbes suggested substituting 
the current payment system for one which more closely resembles a 
defined contribution plan rather than the current defined benefit 
plan, which guarantees pension benefits regardless of the amount 
contributed.  Currently, contributions are mandatory for 15 years. 
   An article in the 23 February EL PAlS claims that Solbes's 
remarks created a sharp reaction from factions within the PSOE. 
Although Socialist Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez defended Solbes by 
stating that he had acted in a manner which "brings him credit," he 
added that government pensions do not represent "a problem for today 
or tomorrow."  Gonzalez reassured current pensioners that they were 
well protected" and that there would always be decent government 
retirement benefits for all citizens.  He also said that "problems 
would not surface until the years 2020 or 2025" but governments 
needed to prepare in advance for changes in Spanish demographics. 
Socialist senator Juan Barranco stated, "this type of declaration 
unfortunately makes the PSOE lose votes and creates uncertainty 
among the citizenry." 
   This same article states that reaction from opposition groups was 
"far more belligerent" than that from the PSOE.  People's Party (PP) 
spokesman Rodrigo Rato demanded that Solbes appear before the 
parliament to explain the government's position on social security 
issues.  Rato characterized the finance minister's remarks as 
"irresponsible" and criticized him for "scaring people."  According 
to United Left (IU) Coordinator General Julio Anguita: "Solbes is 
only stating the obvious.  There is not going to be enough growth in 
employment to generate the necessary resources to be able to pay out 
retirement pensions."  Additionally, Fernando Gimeno, coordinator of 
the joint committee for the Office of the Controller of the 
Currency, reproached Solbes by stating that "such declarations only 
create uncertainty among people from lower income brackets who don't 
have the money to contribute to pension plans."  Gimeno added that 
the government was now working on reforming the taxation system for 
government pensions and he thought it "unfortunate" that people were 
trying to come up with scenarios for 15 years hence. 
   Responding to the criticisms, Solbes remarked that the government 
would continue to guarantee pensions but reaffirmed that "it will be 
necessary to review them" given the change in Spanish demographics. 
Deputy Prime Minister Narcis Serra agreed, stating that in the 
future the state system would guarantee a "decent pension."  (CH) 
(Madrid EL PAlS in Spanish 22 Feb p 45; 23 Feb 94 p 39) 
   LABOR REFORM INCLUDES REVIEW OF DISABILITY BENEFITS--An article 
in EL PAlS notes that the Labor Ministry is working on reforms 
encompassing disability, unemployment, and health issues in the work 
place, which would complete the labor market legislation being 
considered in parliament.  The Labor Ministry plans to blur two 
distinct categories which define workers as either "temporarily 
incapacitated" or "temporarily disabled."  These definitions would 
be combined into a single "temporary" category, paying benefits for 
less than the current six years.  By reducing the time that someone 
would spend on "temporary disability" before going on to be declared 
"permanently disabled," the Labor Ministry hopes to return workers 
to their jobs once they have overcome health problems so they do not 
remain on disability for six years.  Funds would then be directed 
exclusively to those who really need them. 
   The Labor Ministry also plans to establish teams, which would be 
administered by doctors working for the Social Security system, to 
evaluate disabled workers (EVI).  According to the article, the 
doctors will introduce more rigorous standards for the evaluation 
process to return employees more quickly to the work place.  These 
doctors would also review pensions which are in force to determine 
the status of disability benefits in the event that the worker 
should recover. (CH)  (Madrid EL PAlS in Spanish 22 Feb 1994 p 45) 
BBV PRESIDENT ON POSSIBLE BANESTO TAKEOVER--An article in the 
Madrid daily El PAlS by correspondents M.A. Noceda and J. Rivera, 
reports that BBV President Emilio Ybarra announced during a 
shareholders meeting that the bank was seriously considering the 
purchase of a "significant" amount of shares of Banesto, Spain's 
third largest bank and the subject of a Bank of Spain mandated 
reorganization.  Ybarra did not specify if BBV would be the only 
buyer or if other financial institutions would be involved but he 
added that everything would depend on "the conditions of the sale." 
He stated, "we are not going to be blinded by the zeal to be number 
one nor will we close the doors to other competitors."  Ybarra noted 
that it would be "interesting" to buy Banesto because such a move 
would reinforce BBV's position of leadership.  He cautioned, 
however, that BBV would not consider growth "at any cost."  He 
stressed that BBV would only contemplate the purchase of shares if 
it were deemed in the best interest of all shareholders. 
Reportedly, shareholders were divided on the proposed takeover. 
Ybarra also underscored that Banesto "would be worth zero were it 
not for the support of all of the banks," adding that Banesto's 
losses in 1993 will reach "over 50 billion pesetas."  He confirmed 
that Alfredo Saenz, who was formerly vice chairman at BBV, would 
continue as Banesto's chairman if the takeover occurs.  The article 
reported that the Bank of Santander is BBV's "principal rival" in 
the upcoming takeover bid for Banesto.  Because of their size these 
two banks would make it difficult for smaller institutions to bid on 
shares. (CH)  (Madrid EL PAlS in Spanish 27 Feb 94 p 43) 
   CONGRESS DESIGNATES SPECIAL COMMITTEE FOR BANESTO--According to 
an article in EL PAlS by correspondent Jorge Rivera, the executive 
board for the Congress of Deputies reached an agreement on 24 
February to create a special committee to oversee the Banesto 
reorganization.  Jose Bevia, a Socialist and first vice president of 
the Congress, stated that the committee was to be created with a 
"basic agreement between Socialists and PP members."  Bevia was 
pleased that a committee had been decided on because it ensures 
public, open sessions, which the press will be able to attend.  The 
special committee will be coordinated by three members from the PSOE 
and PP respectively.  IU and Catalan Convergence and Union (CiU) 
will each have two representatives.  Canary Islands Coalition (CC) 
and the Mixed Group (Valencian Union) will each have one 
representative. (CH)  (Madrid EL PAlS in Spanish 25 Feb 94 p 47) 
   SWEDEN 
   STUDY SEES JOB GROWTH CONFINED TO INDUSTRIAL SECTOR--According to 
a study carried out by the Labor Market Board (AMS), the only sector 
of the Swedish economy expected to show an increase in employment in 
1994 is the industrial sector.  AMS divides the labor market into 
four sectors:  industry, construction, private services, and public 
services.  The private services sector, which is the largest, 
includes most service industry workers, such as bank and insurance 
company employees and journalists.  The number of jobs in this 
sector has fallen by 7-percent in the last three years and is 
expected to continuing falling.  Unemployment is also expected to 
increase in the construction sector, where 29 percent of the jobs 
have been lost.  The public sector, which includes teachers and 
health and child care providers, has seen a 7 percent drop in the 
number of jobs.  This decrease is now expected to level off.  Only 
in the industrial sector, made up mostly of blue-collar workers, is 
an increase forecast.  The sector has, however, already lost 24 
percent of its jobs, and AMS fears these jobs are now gone for good. 
(WS)  (Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 26 Feb 94 p 14) 
   VOLVO SEEN SEEKING PROJECT-BY-PROJECT PARTNERSHIPS--After its 
rejection of a merger with Renault, Volvo must catch up 
internationally and will probably seek partners on a project-by- 
project basis.  This is the conclusion of an assessment published in 
the business weekly VECKANS AFFARER.  According to the assessment, 
Volvo has "lost" the last four years, which its competitors have 
used to conclude international partnerships.  Its credibility 
damaged, Volvo is hardly in a position to seek new long-term 
partners immediately.  Therefore, the most viable alternative is to 
establish a series of limited partnerships for specific projects. 
This strategy would reduce costs while retaining the company's 
independence and reputation.  The assessment cites Volvo's agreement 
with Mitsubishi to develop a new midsize car as a model for future 
cooperation.  Under the agreement, Volvo will develop a successor to 
its 400 model at greatly reduced cost while gaining access to 
Japanese technology.  The Swedish firm also recently concluded an 
agreement with Chrysler to build jeeps in Thailand.  (WS) 
(Stockholm VECKANS AFFARER in Swedish 21 Feb 94 p 19) 
   ECONOMIC BRIEF 
   France 
   --Government to subsidize part of price increase in French 
pharmaceuticals for African franc zone (CFA) countries where 
devaluation occurred.  subsidies to last three months for 20 
products, will entail 50 percent of gross price increase. . .goal to 
guarantee medical supplies there. (LE FIGARO Le Fig-Eco supplement 2 
Mar 94 p I) 
   Anilla B. (703-733-6283), Roger B. (703-733-6508), Robert H. 
(703-733-6504), Carolina H. (703-733-6388), Dian I. (703-733-6286), 
Rosa M. (703-733-6287), Joel S. (703-733-6503), Wendy S. (703-733- 
6506), and Charles W. (703-733-6473) contributed to this Foreign 
Media Survey. 
ELAG/10 MAR/ECONF/WED/SM 11/0258Z MAR 
</TEXT>
</DOC>
